Grant Hardaway  
INF385T - Peer Production  

# Peer Production Participation Project: Experience Report

## Introduction
For this project, I participated in the peer production community of the collaborative 
music and film database [Rate Your Music (RYM)]( https://rateyourmusic.com/). As 
stated in my community identification paper, my goal for this project was to add and 
improve entries for Austin musicians and their albums. Over the course of a month, I 
was able to successfully contribute multiple additions to the database.

## Preparation  
Before I could contribute to RYM, I needed to set up a free account and research what 
artists or albums were missing from their catalog. The account set-up was simple and 
took me less than five minutes. To check what artists or albums were missing from the 
catalog, I searched Austin band names in the webpage’s search bar. If the artist did 
not appear in the search results, RYM would present a link at the bottom of the page 
to add an artist. Through this process, I identified three Austin musicians that did 
not have any record on RYM.

To prepare for creating a new entry, I looked over RYM’s 
[wiki](https://rateyourmusic.com/wiki/Music:Add+an+artist) on adding artist profiles 
to the database. Then, I gathered reliable sources on the artists through bandcamp, 
Facebook, and/or their own personal webpage. Once I felt like I was adequately 
prepared, I would begin an entry.

## Participation
The “Add artist” page is initially overwhelming with jargon such as “artist ID links” 
prominently featured in the descriptions of fields and some optional fields that are 
unnecessary for smaller artists. I regularly referenced RYM’s 
[wiki](https://rateyourmusic.com/wiki/Music:Artist+profiles) on artist profiles to 
help me navigate the page’s interface. I would then enter in all of the relevant 
information (e.g. artist name, band members, search hints, sources of information, 
etc.) and submit my entry for review.

## Submission Moderation
Submission review consists of an individual appraising my entry and then voting “yes” 
or “no” on its accuracy and adherence to the database’s guidelines. The reviewer 
checks the sources provided in the entry’s meta-comments to verify that the 
information for the artist is correct. Before voting, a reviewer can add a comment on 
the submission discussion page to suggest a correction. A submission would then be 
approved either when three community members (who have a standard account like myself) 
vote “yes” or a single moderator votes “yes”.

For my first profile submission of the artist [Little 
Mazarn](https://rateyourmusic.com/artist/little-mazarn), a moderator named “jshopa” 
identified a couple of errors that needed to be corrected before the profile could be 
approved. For instance, I had listed the artist’s place of birth as Austin, but, as 
the moderator pointed out, my sources only indicated that the artist currently lived 
in Austin. Additionally, I needed to add a release, credit, or gig to her page before 
the artist could be deemed relevant enough to be added to the database. Once I had 
made the requested changes, the moderator approved my entry. The learning curve of 
this first entry helped my submissions for the other two artist profiles ([Duncan 
Fellows](https://rateyourmusic.com/artist/duncan-fellows) and [Big Wy’s Brass 
Band](https://rateyourmusic.com/artist/big-wys-brass-band)) to go smoothly.

## Conclusion
My experience on RYM was largely positive. As a regular user of the database, it was 
fascinating to look behind the scenes on how the massive collection is created and 
moderated. I plan on continuing to contribute to RYM in the future and help small 
Austin musicians have a record of their work on the database.
