#### Peer Production Adaptation Paper
Taka Kodani  
4/8/18

Peer production is typically used to describe a method of production 
within the free/libre and open-source software (FLOSS) community and the 
Wikipedia community, but there are other domains that practice basic 
tenets of peer production and can therefore be considered a peer 
production community, though perhaps to not as great of an extent as 
what can readily be found in software development and Wikipedia. One 
such example is the scanlation community. Although not everything that 
takes place within the scanlation community accords with certain, 
stricter definitions of *peer production,* many of the practices and 
behaviors found in this particular community do have similar bearing to 
the practices and behaviors observed in FLOSS and Wikipedia communities. 
The purpose of this paper will be to highlight both the similarities and 
differences and show how the scanlation community exercises peer 
production techniques to generate scanlated works.

Scanlation is a portmanteau term referring to the process of *scanning* 
comics into a digital format and providing a *translation* so that it is 
distributed to a wider audience. This process is not official, meaning 
that it is typically not performed with the expressed consent of the 
author or the publisher but gratis by the fans, for the fans. Although 
legal concerns and actions have come up and persisted for as long as 
scanlation communities have existed (Lee, 2009), they will not be the 
main focus of this paper. Usually, the comics that are being scanlated 
are Japanese manga and they are often translated to English, but the 
original source does not necessarily need to be from Japan or be in 
Japanese, and the translated language can be anything other than 
English. With anime and manga becoming increasingly popular around the 
world (Rampant, 2010), and with the number of global Internet users 
expanding each year (ITU, n.d.), there is a complex web of Japanese 
*manga,* Korean *manwha,* and Chinese *manhua* being translated and 
re-translated into various languages.
 
Before discussing how peer production can be found in the scanlation 
community, definitions of peer production will be provided, and certain 
aspects of peer production will then be extracted from these definitions 
to examine how they may be present (or absent) in the scanlation 
community. Benkler (2016) defines peer production to include the 
following three core characteristics: "(a) decentralization of 
conception and execution of problems and solutions, (b) harnessing 
diverse motivations, and (c) separation of governance and management 
from property and contract." Meanwhile, Tapscott (2008) describes it as 
such: 

> In its purest form, [peer production] is a way of producing goods and 
services that relies entirely on self-organizing, egalitarian 
communities of individuals who come together voluntarily to produce a 
shared outcome. In reality, peer production mixes elements of hierarchy 
and self-organization and relies on meritocratic principles of 
organization.

Combining these definitions, we can extract the following 
characteristics about peer production: It 1) results in a group of 
individuals producing a good or service; 2) decentralizes the 
"conception and execution of problems and solutions"; 3) gathers 
together volunteers who have a wide range of motivations; and 4) 
establishes governance without property or contract.

**Good or service production.** The main purpose of the scanlation 
community is to scanlate manga from one language to another and share 
their work with others freely through the Internet. According to 
MangaUpdates.com there are currently close to 1,000 scanlation groups 
that have been active within the past six months as of this writing--to 
put it another way, 1,000 unique groups have released at least one 
scanlated chapter to the public through whatever distribution channel(s) 
they use. Moreoever, the same website has accounted for over 6,200 
scanlation groups that have been inactive over the past six months, a 
majority of which are likely permanently out of operation. The 
scanlation groups differ in staff membership size--from dozens to, 
though rare, one individual--and depending on the size, the amount, 
regularity, and quality of content that they release may also differ 
group to group. With MyAnimeList.com listing more than 30,000 unique 
manga series (of which 3,000+ are currently either in publication or in 
hiatus), there is no shortage of manga to scanlate, evidenced by the 
dozens, even hundreds, of new chapters that are released *in English* on 
a daily basis (MangaUpdates, n.d.). Volume should be much higher when 
scanlations of languages other than English is accounted for. And so, in 
sum, does the scanlation community produce a substantial amount of 
content like peer production communities? Yes.

**Decentralization of the conception and execution of problems and 
solutions.** In the process of scanlating a chapter of a manga, work is 
divided among the members of a scanlation group based on their 
individual roles. Common positions include the scanner, who scans the 
pages of a manga book or a manga magazine and uploads the scanned 
images--called *raws*--online; the translator, who reads the raws and 
provides the translation in an organized text file; the cleaner, who 
removes the original text and cleans up the raws so that they appear 
presentable; the typesetter, who places the translated text on the 
cleaned pages and makes the font and size similar to the original; and 
the proofreader or editor, who serves as quality control to ensure the 
scanlations are free of error and up to standards (The Zero Alliance, 
2017; DP Scanlations, n.d.). A individual may assume more than one role, 
and a single role or task may be fulfilled by more than one individual.

A major difference between scanlation communities and FLOSS/Wikipedia 
communities is that, in the latter, progress of a project is immediately 
visible to the public, and individuals can "pick up" any task they want 
to complete at their leisure--a huge benefit that aids the development 
of something as complex as software, for example (Howison and Crowston, 
2014). Moreover, owing to a lack of entry barriers, anyone can make 
edits, both good and bad (Tapscott, 2008), though these communities tend 
to have a system in place that allow mods, admins, and even other 
non-authority figures to approve, reject, and/or reverse these edits 
(Geiger & Ribes, 2010). Scanlation groups howeve require that each staff 
member is qualified to do the task he or wishes to work on and may 
mandate a test to join and participate. In addition, they do not release 
a chapter publicly until it is entirely finished. And yet, within the 
group itself, similarities between scanlation communities and 
FLOSS/Wikipedia communities begin.

A cleaner I interviewed has stated that her group uses a web and mobile 
application called Trello, an online project managament app, to host and 
collaborate on the scanned pages for manga chapters that are in 
progress. This allows her to access the group's projects, update them 
with her cleaned pages, check their statuses, and even "pick up" any of 
the tasks that are not being worked on, if she is able and if she has 
prior approval, regardless of her initial role assignment. This method 
apparently expedites the scanlation process and grants the group members 
greater freedom on what they can do to contribute. Her group also relies 
heavily on Discord, a voice and text chat app, to communicate instantly 
not just with her other group members but also with fans who may perhaps 
read the group's releases. Within her group's Discord server, some more 
instances of collaboration can be witnessed: For example, there is a 
channel set up for translation help. Translators (particularly the less 
experienced and less culturally knowledgeable) go here to solicit 
answers to questions they may have on a translation they are working on, 
both from other staff members and from the general public. On the 
outside, scanlation groups may seem like a centralized unit with fixed, 
pre-assigned roles for the staff (and this is still true to an extent), 
but overall work is somewhat dispersed on the inside and has, as my 
interviewee has said, become more so over the years thanks to the 
introduction of new and improved tools and platforms for collaboration.

**Volunteers with wide range of motivations.** Benkler (2016) remarks 
that motivational forces that encourage people to participate in peer 
production communities are diverse and heterogeneous. One study which 
investigated what motivates Wikipedians to contribute found that fun, 
values, understanding, enhancement, protectiveness, and career 
advancement were some of the more significant motivational factors (Nov, 
2007). Lakhani and von Hippel (2003) looked into why Apache community 
members provided "mundane but necessary" tasks such as field support for 
free and identified reciprocity, helping a cause, gaining reputation, 
and intrinsic rewards (such as feelings of competence and fun) as strong 
motivators. They also found that information providers were more likely 
to help when the provision of answers came at a low cost--that it could 
be done quickly and easily. As Tapscott (2008) says, "This makes their 
overall investment of time and energy minimal in relation to the 
benefits they receive in return." And tasks that are larger or more 
difficult to accomplish alone tend to be deferred, rather than tackled 
immediately through structured teamwork (Howison & Crowston, 2014).

Scanlation activities began as an underground movement sometime in the 
1990s with the advancement of the Internet and other digital technology, 
as fans would scanlate manga from Japan for English-speaking audiences 
who might otherwise never have been able to read certain manga due to 
the lack of official English-translated releases (Rampant, 2010). To 
this day, fans have a desire to consume manga from foreign countries, 
and finding scanlations online to read is easy, not to mention costless. 
For the scanlation group members, they are all volunteers who devote 
their time to provide scanlations to others free of charge. The factors 
that motivate them to do so are very similar to motivators seen in 
participants of FLOSS/Wikipedia communities. As my interviewee has said, 
"I did it so that I could be one the first people to read scanlations of 
Hetalia [a manga she was helping scanlate]," which is similar to the 
idea that contributors of an open-source software project contribute to 
benefit themselves--because they want to add new features they want to 
use or to fix a bug that impeded their work (Lee, Carver, & Bosu, 2017). 
Based on her interactions with her group members, my interviewee also 
verifies the fact that they participate for various other reasons 
including to have fun, to give back to the community, and to improve (or 
even to show off) their skills. In addition, the anime and manga 
community has a massive social interactivity component to it. Fans are 
typically young, are technologically skilled, and love to speak with 
others on a shared, somewhat niche interest. Every scanlation group's 
Discord server and anime and/or manga forum I have visited is rife with 
activity, and my interviewee confirms that she would not have been 
active as she had been if communication with her group members and with 
other fans had been more limited. 

**Governance without property or contract.** In a commons-based peer 
production, Benkler (2016) states that it is "the lack of need of actors 
to seek permission or await direction before acting that allows peer 
production to avoid the information and diversity losses associated with 
price-cleared and hierarchical systems." Participants have the freedom 
to operate on their own, but depending on which governance model is used 
in a FLOSS community, the degree to which they are able to exercise that 
freedom may differ. If governance exists in the form of a benevolent 
dictator, decisions are less participatory, but governance in the form 
of a formal meritocracy or democracy, decisions become more 
participatory (OSS Watch, 2013; Fogel, 2018). Governance models in 
scanlation groups may differ group to group, but in the one my 
interviewee used to be a member of, most of the larger decisions--such 
as which manga projects to work on, whether to accept an applicant, and 
who to assign what roles to which manga--were made among the 
administrators, who in turn were composed of co-founders of the group 
and veteran staff members. That said, they cannot compel staff members 
to behave a certain way. Staff members are free to work (or not work) on 
their role assignments as they please, can freely join or leave a group, 
and can be rather easily replaced by new or existing staff members. As 
in the case of FLOSS/Wikipedia communities, this kind of liberty seems 
beneficial to the scanlation group process as a whole, as participants 
are not beholden to any contracts and can enter and leave at no cost.

This paper has aimed to describe the scanlation community and to note 
some of the similarities and differences between it and the 
FLOSS/Wikipedia community in the context of characteristics that define 
peer production. In sum, scanlation groups contain some significant 
elements of a peer production community and it does not seem far-fetched 
to deem them one. 

#### References
Benkler, Y. (2016). Peer production and cooperation. Handbook on the 
Economics of the Internet, 91.

DP Scanlations (n.d.). Retrieved April 08, 2018, from 
[http://www.deathsvertigo.com/dp_scanlations/tutorials/](http://www.deathsvertigo.com/dp_scanlations/tutorials/)

Fogel, K. (2005). Producing open source software: How to run a 
successful free software project. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.".

Geiger, R.S., & Ribes, D. (2010, February). The work of sustaining order 
in wikipedia: the banning of a vandal. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work (pp. 117-126). ACM.

Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2014). Collaboration through open 
superposition. Mis Quarterly, 38(1), 29-50.

ITU. (n.d.). Number of internet users worldwide from 2005 to 2017 (in 
millions). In Statista - The Statistics Portal. Retrieved April 7, 2018, 
from 
[https://www-statista-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/statistics/273018/number-of-internet-users-worldwide/](https://www-statista-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/statistics/273018/number-of-internet-users-worldwide/).

Lakhani, K.R., & Von Hippel, E. (2003). How open source software 
works:“free” user-to-user assistance. Research policy, 32(6), 923-943.

Lee, A., Carver, J.C., & Bosu, A. (2017, May). Understanding the 
impressions, motivations, and barriers of one time code contributors to 
FLOSS projects: a survey. In Proceedings of the 39th International 
Conference on Software Engineering (pp. 187-197). IEEE Press.

Lee, H.K. (2009). Between fan culture and copyright infringement: manga 
scanlation. Media, Culture & Society, 31(6), 1011-1022.

Manga Updates (n.d.). Retrieved April 08, 2018, from 
[https://www.mangaupdates.com/groups.html](https://www.mangaupdates.com/groups.html)

MyAnimeList (n.d.). Retrieved April 08, 2018, from 
[https://myanimelist.net/](https://myanimelist.net/)

Nov, O. (2007). What motivates wikipedians?. Communications of the ACM, 
50(11), 60-64.

OSS Watch provides unbiased advice and guidance on the use, development, 
and licensing of free software, open source software, and open source 
hardware. (2013). Retrieved April 08, 2018, from 
[http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/governancemodels](http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/governancemodels)

Rampant, J. (2010). The manga polysystem: What fans want, fans get. In 
T. Johnson-Woods (Ed.), *Manga: An anthology of global and cultural 
perspectives* (pp. 221-232). New York: Continuum International 
Publishing Group.

Tapscott, D., & Williams, A.D. (2008). Wikinomics: How mass 
collaboration changes everything. Penguin.

The Zero Alliance. (2017, June 24). Retrieved April 08, 2018, from 
[http://zero-alliance.org/join-recruitment/](http://zero-alliance.org/join-recruitment/)

