<center>
<h1>
Peer Production Adaptation Paper: Jamendo
</h1>
<h3>
Justin Segler
</h3>
</center>
<br />

Peer production is a methodology for the creation and development of
various goods and services based on a model of self-organization and
distributed contribution. Peer production has been made more common
through sites like GitHub and Wikipedia; however, the implications,
applications, and adaptations of peer production extend beyond the realm
of software development. Peer production can be applied to a multitude
of projects and ideas, from open governance to open culture.

One community, Jamendo, has shown the adaptation of peer production to
be successful in the organization, collaboration, and synchronization of
music among independent artists and music lovers worldwide. Jamendo,
originally developed as a service for releasing music under Creative
Commons licenses, has grown into an entire community for completely free
sharing and downloading of music, “bringing together a worldwide
community of independent music” and connecting musicians and music
lovers across the globe. Peer production projects, like Jamendo, are
defined by the following three principles: “decentralization of
conception and execution of problems and solutions,” “harnessing diverse
motivations,” and “separation of governance and management from property
and contract” (Benkler 1).

Jamendo presents a great employment of the decentralization of
conception and execution of problems and solutions. Whereas some music
sharing applications like iTunes and Spotify allow for the centralized
access and sharing of music, in which music makers must submit their
music to moderators who determine which music is to be added to the
site, Jamendo decentralizes this process such that any music maker can
upload their music to the site to be accessed by music lovers, apart
from the screening or filtering of centralized moderators. Benkler
explains that the benefit of peer production is “the lack of need of
actors to seek permission or await direction before acting” in which
these actors have “the freedom to operate with resources in the arena on
projects” (Benkler 19). Jamendo provides this freedom from the
hierarchical system of having to submit music to moderators for
admission of new music, allowing music creators to freely submit new
music to the database. Hence, Jamendo decentralizes and democratizes the
process of executing the creation of an open database of independent
music.

Jamendo also serves as a great example of a peer production system in
that it harnesses a diverse set of motivations of participation by both
music creators and music lovers. Many music creators post music to the
site as a sheer hobby; others post music to the site in order to gain
publicity and to establish a music career; some musicians post music to
the site to express themselves. No governing body defines motivations
for submitting and sharing music content. Thus, Jamendo creates an open
and free platform for music creators to do what they love.

There are two main types of motivations that spur individuals to
contribute to peer production systems: intrinsic motivations,
motivations based in an “inherent interest or enjoyment,” and extrinsic
motivations, motivations based in a “separable outcome” (Ryan & Deci,
55). Peer production communities and adaptations involve a diverse set
of both intrinsic and extrinsic motivations. Many of the same intrinsic
and extrinsic motivations exist between more well-known implementations
of peer production, like GitHub and Wikipedia, and Jamendo. A few
intrinsic motivations that drive both participators on Jamendo and
collaborators on GitHub and Wikipedia include enjoyment, leisure, and
learning new things. One anonymous user of Jamendo states, “I have
enjoyed joining and participating in the Jamendo community both because
I find it incredibly fun sharing my music with others and hearing new
types of music, music I otherwise would not be exposed to on more
popular music sites like Spotify.” Jamendo users also have many of the
same extrinsic motivations for participating as do GitHub and Wikipedia
users, such as gaining a reputation, receiving exposure, and career
development. The same anonymous user when asked about if they had any
extrinsic motivations for participating on Jamendo responded that
“Jamendo, as a music sharing system, provides the same potential for
jumpstarting a music career as do other music sharing sites… something
that I have been able to take advantage of in sharing my independent
music with the public.” This diverse set of motivations, both intrinsic
and extrinsic, forms the foundation of Jamendo as a peer production
adaptation.

Thirdly, Jamendo provides a separation between governance/management and
property/contract. This means that those that govern and manage the site
do not have any license or rights to the music uploaded to the site nor
do they claim ownership of the database of music itself. This further
creates an open environment for music creators to share their music
without the constraint of having to forego rights to their music to a
managing or governing body. This enables Jamendo to be a site that
allows the free sharing and downloading of music amongst its users in
which the music creators still maintain the property rights to their own
music.

Contributions to Jamendo are made with little barrier to entry. One
anonymous user of Jamendo commented that “it is super quick and easy to
add new music to the site… which comes as a pleasant surprise to new
users on Jamendo looking to get involved and upload content.” One
advantage of Jamendo, as stated, is that music creators do not have to
have their music content screened and filtered through a governing body
of sorts; rather, musicians are freely able to submit contributions to
the site. This process is simple. Music creators create an artist
profile for themselves. Once their artist profile has been created, the
artist can choose to add a new album or single. Artists are then given
the option to add further details to their content (i.e. album artwork,
a song or album description, lyrics, credits, etc.). Once the artist has
uploaded metadata about their music, they choose to “go online” with
their contribution and their song is then added to the database and is
accessible by other musicians, artists, and music lovers on the site.

This process of contributing to Jamendo is comparable to the process of
contributing to other peer production platforms such as GitHub. On
GitHub, users can create a new project or make a contribution to a
project openly and freely. Users wanting to create a new project start
by creating and publishing a profile for themselves. Once their profile
is created, they can create a new project, add metadata to that project,
upload code to the project, and publish the project publicly on the
GitHub platform to be accessed by other users on the site. This process
of a user creating a new project on GitHub closely mirrors the process
of an artist adding new music to Jamendo.

One main difference between Jamendo and other peer production sites like
GitHub and Wikipedia is that music on Jamendo is static, meaning further
contributions to music uploaded to Jamendo cannot be made; once a song
or an album is added and uploaded to Jamendo, it can only be shared and
downloaded by other users, not tweaked, remastered, or added to. The
utility of sites like GitHub and Wikipedia is that they allow for
collaboration between various software developers worldwide on projects
themselves. This functionality does not exist on Jamendo; music creators
are not able to collaboratively iterate to create new versions of music
on the platform. Jamendo does not employ peer production to foster the
collaboration of musicians on music projects; rather, it employs peer
production to foster the creation of a database of music by independent
artists who desire their music to be shared openly and freely.

One important aspect of peer production adaptations is the concept of
open superposition. Open superposition is “the process of depositing
motivationally independent layers of work on top of each other over
time” (Howison & Crowston, 29). Superposition is present on GitHub and
Wikipedia. On GitHub, superposition is made possible by GitHub as users
can contribute and add patches to projects listed on the site. Patches
are the “unit of contribution” of GitHub projects (Howison & Crowston
34). On Wikipedia, this “unit of contribution” is an addition made to an
article by a Wikipedia user. In contrast, Jamendo does not have an
aspect of open superposition. If Jamendo existed to foster the joint
collaboration of musicians on music projects, open superposition could
very easily be implemented such that each collaborator could pull the
music project, make changes, and upload their new change or “patch” to
the project. However, this is not the intent of Jamendo. Jamendo rather
operates to allow musicians to share their music projects with the
public without the public being able to create contributions to these
projects.

Although the actual producing done by peers on Jamendo does not
necessarily involve direct collaboration between various musicians and
music lovers on music projects themselves, these musicians and music
lovers however do participate in the collaboration of creating and
“producing” the open database of independent music. In short, the peer
production of Jamendo is not found in the collaboration on a per-project
basis but rather on a system-wide basis, in which collaborators create
edits to the system as a whole in adding their new independent music to
the Jamendo database. This collaborative effort of compiling a database
of open and independent music is itself the product of peer production.
Jamendo deviates from many other peer production adaptions in its
licensing. Jamendo originated as a platform which released its music to
the public under the Creative Commons license, one of many public
copyright licenses which allow for “the free distribution of otherwise
copyrighted work” (“Creative Commons,” para. 1). After almost a decade
of operating under Creative Commons licensing, Jamendo adopted an even
more free and open licensing system in which music uploaded to Jamendo
is licensed as “free streaming and downloading” content for personal use
(“Jamendo,” para. 2). This allows users on Jamendo to freely “use,
modify, and share” music content hosted on Jamendo (“GNU General Public
License,” Preamble).

This “free streaming and downloading” license is the default license for
music content contributed to Jamendo. This default licensing actually
differs from that of GitHub, which maintains an All Rights Reserved
license as a default license for its projects, denoting that code hosted
on GitHub without a license is not open for private or commercial use.
Jamendo, on the other hand, allows any and all users to “use, modify,
and share” music hosted on the platform in any way possible.

Although GitHub and Jamendo differ in their default licensing, both
sites allow users to define the licensing for their uploaded projects
and content. Some Jamendo contributors desire their music to be freely
sharable and downloadable, whereas other contributors are motivated
monetarily and desire more strict licensing for their music, thus
providing revenue opportunities for artists through commercial uses. The
fact that the licensing of music on Jamendo is left to “free and open
downloading and sharing” unless otherwise specified by the uploader
proves that Jamendo upholds diverse set of motivations of its users
without these motivations being defined by a governing or managing
entity. Users are given the freedom to decide whether they are motivated
monetarily to distribute their music, in which case they can define
stricter licensing for their music on Jamendo, or if they are just
motivated by the enjoyment of sharing their music with the public, in
which case they simply utilize the default Jamendo licensing for their
music. From its decentralization creating an open database of
independent music to the diverse motivations held by users in
participating in the Jamendo system, from its commitment to free and
open sharing and downloading to its low barriers to entry, Jamendo
serves as a great illustration of a peer production system in a
non-traditional environment. Using peer production, Jamendo provides a
new approach to collecting and sharing music between music creators and
music lovers across the world.

<br />

<center>
<h3>
References
</h3>
</center>
<br />

1.  “About Us.” About Us | Jamendo Music, www.jamendo.com/about.

2.  Anonymous Jamendo User. Personal interview. 4 Apr. 2018.

3.  Benkler, Yochai. “Peer Production and Cooperation.” Handbook on the
    Economics of the Internet, pp. 91–119.,
    doi<nolink>:10.4337/9780857939852.00012.

4.  “Creative Commons License.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 3 Apr.
    2018, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative\_Commons\_license.

5.  “Discovery: Participation Observation” in Howison, J., &
    Crowston, K. (2014). Collaboration through open superposition: A
    theory of the open source way. MIS Quarterly, 38(1), 29–50.

6.  “GNU General Public License.” The GNU Operating System and the Free
    Software Movement, 29 June 2007, www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt.

7.  “Jamendo.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 27 Mar. 2018,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamendo.

8.  “Policies.” Creative Commons, creativecommons.org/policies/.

9.  Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and Extrinsic
    Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions. Contemporary
    Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54–67.

<br /> <br />
