#### PPPP Identification Paper
Taka Kodani\
3/25/18

Scanlation is a portmanteau term referring to the unofficial process of 
"scanning" comics into a digital format and providing a "translation" so 
that it is distributed to a wider audience. Typically, the comics are 
Japanese manga, and they are often translated to English, but the 
original source does not necessarily need to be from Japan, and the 
translated language can be anything other than English. With anime and 
manga becoming increasingly popular around the world, and with global 
Internet user penetration expanding each year, there is a complex web of 
Japanese manga, Korean manhwa, and Chinese manhua being translated and 
re-translated into various languages.

An essential component of the scanlation community that makes it very 
akin to a peer production community is the fact that it consists of fans 
or volunteers who work without any pay to provide translations to the 
manga readers. They are built on the core principle of wanting to share 
content--which may possibly see little to no exposure outside the 
country of its origin due to language, legal, cultural, or economic 
borders--and organize themselves in a way that allows them to execute 
their tasks and deliver the scanlations in a timely manner.

Peer production communities such as those which work to develop FLOSS 
are also often supported by volunteers who contribute their time and 
effort to build, test, or maintain some portion of the project. They are 
motivated by intrinsic factors such as having fun and finding use in the 
product they are helping develop; so too are what prompt scanlation 
group members to participate, though my current guess is that being part 
of a social community that shares comments, reactions, and memes on 
common interests with other members is an additional motivating factor, 
contrary to what Nov (2007) found in researching Wikipedians' 
motivations. Howison and Crowston (2014) talk about the presence of open 
superposition--the act of layering one independent work on top of 
another--as being a fundamental component of many FLOSS projects, but it 
will be interesting to see if this concept applies to scanlation group 
projects as well. (The comparisons are being glossed over in this paper, 
but I will go over them in more details in the adaptation paper.)

I will be participating in a scanlation group as part of the peer 
production participation project. As a fluent speaker of both English 
and Japanese I hope to translate a chapter from a manga from Japanese to 
English and have the translation be used to complete the distribution of 
the translated chapter. Each member in a scanlation group serves a 
defined role based on their abilities, and each group usually includes 
roles like scanner, tranlator, proofreader, cleaner, typesetter, editor, 
and quality control. Because the procedures of each of these roles are 
so similar and predictable regardless of what manga is being scanlated, 
each of these roles is easily translatable from one group to another. My 
expectation is therefore that I will be able to participate without too 
much of an entry barrier, even for a newcomer like me, as long as I am 
able to understand what is expected of me as a translator.

#### References
Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2014). Collaboration through open 
superposition: A theory of the open source way. MIS Quarterly, 38(1), 
29-50.

Nov, O. (2007). What motivates Wikipedians? Communications of the ACM, 
50(11), ACM New York, NY, USA.

